---
layout: post
title: Video Chatting and Eye Contact
categories: ideas
author: Zach Phillips
---

Ever since the first science fiction novels were written, there has been a common dream of face-to-face communication between agents who are not in the same place. A person far away, but virtually present, is something that still seems the stuff of imagination.

When in fact, it isn't.

Video chatting has now been around and cheaply available for more than a decade, and these days we can video chat from our mobile devices, on the road if we want to. Yet for some reason, the true feeling of person-to-person contact still hasn't been captured, and video chat is not widely used for anything more than its novelty. Granted, there are some hardcore users, but for the most part, it still hasn't "hit."

This is a really peculiar thing, when you think about it. I have the ability to video chat with people I don't get to see much anymore, if ever. I am capable of having virtualized contact with family and loved ones thousands of miles away, yet I almost never do it. And when I do, it's usually to show off as a parlor trick.

If video chatting were better than a standard voice call, common logic would indicate that video chatting should be widely in use, because it is widely available.

So what this means is one of two things: 

**Either every childlike dream of this technology simply possessed a lack of foresight that video chatting would actually not present a beneficial experience over the telephone, which is more than a century old…**

or… 

**The current iteration of this technology isn't better than voice alone.**

I reject the former mostly out of intuition, but also for the reason that even if it were true that the visual doesn't add much, the fact would still remain that the audio on video chat is actually better than it is on our current most common communication device, the digital phone, which we opt for 10,000 to 1 over video chatting.

But the latter poses another question: Why doesn't the current way we are able to video chat inspire anything more than a "wow"? Why doesn't it become "This is something we can do now when we want to have better communication."?

In my opinion, the reason for this is that our current system leaves out the most important aspect of communication, which is eye contact. Even animals understand this. If you walk into a room, surprising a dog or cat who is doing something they are not supposed to be doing, the animal will not look at your feet, which have the power to move quickly and injure them. They don't look at your torso, where the major mass of your body is represented. They look you right in the eyes. The eyes tell them more than anything else, about your feelings, intentions, and what your sudden presence really means to them.

Anyone who has attempted a video chat realizes this immediate problem. "I cannot talk to this person because they are not looking at me. We are not really communicating." This may be realized at a sub-conscious level, as just something "missing," but it is always there. Hence the lack of widespread use of this Star Trek/Jetsons dream-become-reality. If you look at the camera, you cannot see your partner. If you look at your partner, your eyes appear to be focused elsewhere on her end. There is nothing currently out there to account for this, and my hypothesis is that this is the problem that needs solving.

##Solution 1 - Hardware/Software

Optical technology is extremely inexpensive in today's world, hence there are cameras added to almost every device, with little added cost. So why not add three more?

Place cameras at four axes, and your video software interpolates them to create a single image with your eyes focused straight forward.

###Advantages

*	Traditionally Patentable (also a disadvantage)
*	Proprietary
*	Creates a sellable, physical product, to go with a virtual one.

###Disadvantages

*	Costly to develop
*	Competition from the big boys
*	Not multi-platform out of the box
*	Reliant upon mass-adoption
*	Consumer electronics markets are terribly hard

I hate this solution if I'm not Apple.

##Solution 2 - Hardware

Put a camera inside the screen looking out, without affecting the display performance.

###Advantages/Disadvantages

*	Same as the previous solution, with the added problem that it may be impossible with current technology

I hate this if I'm not a major manufacturer in China.

##Solution 3 - Software

Software that recognizes eyes, and artificially corrects the eyeline, shifting just a few pixels.

Advantages

*	Could be developed by a small developer
*	Can be improved and maintained by a small core team
*	Patentable, if you like that sort of thing
*	Cross-platform
*	Licensable to licensees large, small, and fucking gigantic
*	Can become the center of a software service

If you can't tell, I like this one.

##Monetization

License it to device makers and OS developers.

License it to individuals as a system plug-in.

Create an online video chatting service with eye contact. Complete with apps, advertisements (if you're into that sort of thing), and enterprise-level services.

Of course, it has to be mentioned: Sell it to Skype or someone.

##Anyways

I would like to work on a pitch for this, but I don't have the beginnings of the know-how to implement something like this. For a developer, the coolest part of it (I think) is that it gives you one, concrete, simple (but not easy) problem to solve.

And I bet it changes the game. 

People may not even realize why video chatting didn't catch on "until now," but some will see what is obvious but not so obvious: That the majority of the pleasure we get from talking to other humans is the visual feedback we get from our words to their faces, our eyes to their eyes.

We could call it Eyeline. Or iLine, if you're into that.

It's outside-the-box, I know. But it might be just the thing.

Anyone want to work on this? We'll help. Or you can just take it and run with it.